Edit security-proactive-authentication.adoc (#37851)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-proactive-authentication.adoc

:topics: security,authentication
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-vertx-http

Proactive authentication is enabled in Quarkus by default.
If an incoming request has a credential, the request is always authenticated, even if the target page does not require authentication.

[[proactive-authentication]]

Requests with an invalid credential are always rejected, even when the page is public.

> If you only want to authenticate when the target page requires authentication, you can change the default behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the default behavior if you only want to authenticate when the target page requires authentication.
```

Author: Updated. Thanks.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

This is because authentication might have yet to happen, and accessing `SecurityIdentity` might require calls to external systems, such as databases, that might block the operation.
For blocking applications, this is not an issue.
However, if you have disabled authentication in a reactive application, this fails because you cannot do blocking operations on the I/O thread.
To work around this, you need to `@Inject` an instance of `io.quarkus.security.identity.CurrentIdentityAssociation` and call the `Uni<SecurityIdentity> getDeferredIdentity();` method.
Then, you can subscribe to the resulting `Uni` to be notified when authentication is complete and the identity is available.

[NOTE]
====
You can still access `SecurityIdentity` synchronously with `public SecurityIdentity getIdentity()` in xref:resteasy-reactive.adoc[RESTEasy Reactive] from endpoints that are annotated with `@RolesAllowed`, `@Authenticated`, or with respective configuration authorization checks because authentication has already happened.
The same is also valid for xref:reactive-routes.adoc[Reactive routes] if a route response is synchronous.
====

> xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#standard-security-annotations[Standard security annotations] on CDI beans are not supported on an I/O thread if a non-void secured method returns a value synchronously and proactive authentication is disabled because they must access `SecurityIdentity`.

Author: Does it helpt to rephrase this? 
Suggestion A:
```suggestion
If a non-void secured method returns a value synchronously and proactive authentication is disabled, xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#standard-security-annotations[standard security annotations] on CDI beans are not supported on an I/O thread because they must access `SecurityIdentity`.
```
Suggestion B:
```suggestion
When proactive authentication is disabled, xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#standard-security-annotations[standard security annotations] used on CDI beans do not function on an I/O thread if a secured method that is not void synchronously returns a value. This limitation arises from the necessity for these methods to access `SecurityIdentity`.
```
What do you think, @sberyozkin ?

Reviewer 2: Hi @rolfedh, suggestion B reads easier to me, thanks

Author: Updated. Thanks!

> xref:security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc#standard-security-annotations[Standard security annotations] on Contexts and Dependency Injection (CDI) beans are not supported on an I/O thread if a non-void secured method returns a value synchronously and proactive authentication is disabled because they need to access `SecurityIdentity`.

Reviewer 2: `CDI` is a such a well known term that it is probably not an acronym anymore, so I'm not sure  providing  `Contexts and Dependency Injection` for completeness/clarification is needed, I saw it was done in one of your PRs, which was fine, but we may have many more `CDI` acronyms around, I'd consider leaving it as it is

Author: Okay. Thanks. I'll add this to a list of acronyms that don't need expansion in Quarkus docs.

Author: I created an issue for this: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/37867

An identity can be requested because of security rules that require the user to authenticate or because programmatic access to the current identity is required.

> If proactive authentication is in use, accessing `SecurityIdentity` is a blocking operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If proactive authentication is used, accessing `SecurityIdentity` is a blocking operation.
```

Author: Updated. Thanks.

}
----

CAUTION: Some HTTP authentication mechanisms must handle authentication exceptions themselves to create a correct authentication challenge.

> For example, `io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.CodeAuthenticationMechanism`, which manages OpenID Connect (OIDC) authorization code flow authentication, must build a correct redirect URL and cookies, among other components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, `io.quarkus.oidc.runtime.CodeAuthenticationMechanism`, which manages OpenID Connect (OIDC) authorization code flow authentication, must build a correct redirect URL and set a state cookie.
```

Author: Updated. Thanks.
